# FOCS Homework 11, for Day 12

You may edit your answers into this file, or add a separate file in the same directory.

If you add a separate file, please include the following at the top:

```
Student Name: Jordan Van Duyne
Check one:
[x] I completed this assignment without assistance or external resources.
[ ] I completed this assignment with assistance from ___
   and/or using these external resources: ___
```

## I. Formal Proofs

Use the rules of inference from class (reprinted below) to construct formal, numbered proofs of the following:

### 1.

Assuming _p -> q_ and _p -> r_, prove _p -> (q AND r)_

1. p → q; premise
2. p → r; premise
3. p → q ∧ r; 1, 2, conjunction ∎

### 2.

Assuming _p -> (q OR r)_ and _p -> (q OR NOT r)_, prove _p -> q_

1. p → q ∨ r; premise
2. p → q ∨ ~r; premise
3. p → (q ∨ r) ∧ (q ∨ ~r); 1, 2, conjunction
4. p → q ∨ (r ∧ ~r); 3, distributive
5. p → q ∨ F; 4, negation
6. p → q; 5, identity ∎

## II. Truth tables

Use a truth table to show the equivalence of the assumptions and conclusion from problem 1, above:  Assuming _p -> q_ and _p -> r_, prove _p -> (q AND r)_

[Style note:  what is the canonical order of the rows in a truth table for three propositions?]

_p_ | _q_ | _r_ | _p → q_ | _p → r_ | _q ∧ r_ | _p → (q ∧ r)_ |
----|-----|-----|---------|---------|---------|---------------|
 F  |  F  | F   | T       | T       | F       | T             
 F  |  F  | T   | T       | T       | F       | T             
 F  |  T  | F   | T       | T       | F       | T             
 F  |  T  | T   | T       | T       | T       | T             
 T  |  F  | F   | F       | F       | F       | F             
 T  |  F  | T   | F       | T       | F       | F             
 T  |  T  | F   | F       | F       | F       | F             
 T  |  T  | T   | T       | T       | T       | T             


The premises are true in lines 1, 2, 3, 4, and 8. The argument is also true in, and only in, lines 1, 2, 3, 4, and 8, so the argument is valid.


## III. Tautology, satisfiable, contradiction

Which of the following are tautologies?  Satisfiable?  Unsatisfiable (contradictions)?

### 1. _(p AND q AND r) -> (p OR q)_
tautology

1. _(p AND q AND r)_ ; premise
2. _p_; 1, specialization
3. _q_; 1, specialization
4. _p OR q_; 1, specialization

### 2. _((p -> q) AND (q -> r)) -> (p -> r)_

tautology

### 3. _(p -> q) -> p_

satisfiable

(if p is true, then _(p -> q) -> p_)

### 4. _(p OR q OR r) AND ((NOT p) OR (NOT q) OR (NOT r)) AND (p OR (NOT q)) AND (q OR (NOT r)) OR (r OR (not p))_

satisfiable

(one of the following satisfies: r, ~p, (and also possibly more combinations))

### 5. [** challenge/optional] _(p <=> (q OR r)) -> ((NOT q) -> (p AND r))_



## IV. CNF

Transform the following formula into conjunctive normal form.  Show your steps.

_p OR (q AND NOT (r AND (s -> t)))_

- _p ∨ (q ∧ ~(r ∧ (s → t)))_; premise
- _p ∨ (q ∧ (~r ∨ ~(s → t)))_; De Morgan's
- _p ∨ (q ∧ (~r ∨ (s ∧ ~t)))_; conditional
- _p ∨ (q ∧ ((~r ∨ s) ∧ (~r ∨ ~t)))_ ;distributive
- _(p ∨ q) ∧ (p ∨ ((~r ∨ s) ∧ (~r ∨ ~t)))_; distributive
- _(p ∨ q) ∧ ((p ∨ (~r ∨ s)) ∧ (p ∨ (~r ∨ ~t)))_; distributive
- _(p ∨ q) ∧ (p ∨ (~r ∨ s)) ∧ (p ∨ (~r ∨ ~t)))_; associative
- _(p ∨ q) ∧ (p ∨ ~r ∨ s) ∧ (p ∨ ~r ∨ ~t)_; associative

Conjunctive normal form: _(p ∨ q) ∧ (p ∨ ~r ∨ s) ∧ (p ∨ ~r ∨ ~t)_

## V. Short certificate

Demonstrate that the formula in problem IV is satisfiable.  Explain whether you used a  "short certificate" or exhaustive enumeration to make this determination.

This formula is satisfiable if _p_ is true. I used a short certificate; in the original form of the formula, the formula has _p OR (...)_, meaning that if _p_ is true, the entire statement overall is true. Furthermore, in the CNF, every term that is ANDed together has
_p OR (...)_, meaning that each of these three terms is true if _p_ is true, and thus the overall formula is also true if the three subterms are true since they are ANDed together. 




[several problems adapted from Ullman FOCS ch12]
